---
layout: post
title: "Intro to Crypto"
date: 2017-08-18
author: Ashish Kumar
category: 
tags: 
- Crypto
- tutorial
categories:
- tutorial
- Crypto

image:
  url:

---

### Cryptology
Cryptology, science concerned with data communication and storage in secure and usually secret form. Cryptology is made up of cryptography and cryptanalysis.

The first, cryptography, is the actual securing, control, and identification of digital data. It deals with all aspects of secure messaging, authentication, digital signatures, electronic money, and other applications. The second, cryptanalysis, is made up of all the attempts one might develop to undermine, circumvent, and/or break what the first part, cryptography, is attempting to accomplish. This article mainly focuses on the first part.





### The Basic Principles
##### 1. Encryption
Encryption is the process of encoding information in such a way that eavesdroppers could not read the information unless they had a special key to decrypt it. There may be cases when same key can be used for both encryption and decryption while in certain cases, encryption and decryption may require different keys. 

A cipher is an algorithm, process, or method for performing encryption and decryption.  A cipher has a set of well-defined steps that can be followed to encrypt and decrypt messages. Plaintext is any information before it has been encrypted.  Ciphertext is the output information of an encryption cipher.  Many encryption systems carry many layers of encryption, in which the ciphertext output becomes the plaintext input to another encryption layer.  The process of decryption takes ciphertext and transforms it back into the original plaintext

Some cryptographic methods rely on the secrecy of the algorithms; such algorithms are only of historical interest and are not adequate for real-world needs. These are the major characteristics that separate modern cryptography from the classical approach.

   *  In any modern/computerized encryption scheme we represent our symbols using binary digits and perform a lot of bitwise operations like XOR, AND, OR, etc
   *  It relies on publicly known mathematical algorithms for coding the information. Secrecy is obtained through a secrete key which is used as the seed for the algorithms. The computational difficulty of algorithms, absence of secret key, etc., make it impossible for an attacker to obtain the original information even if he knows the algorithm used for coding.
    * Modern cryptography requires parties interested in secure communication to possess the secret key only.



##### 2. Authentication

 This  property  is  the  equivalent  of  a  signature.  The  receiver  of  a  message  wants proof that a message comes from a certain party and not from somebody else (even if the original party later wants to deny it).
 
##### 3. Integrity

Data integrity provides assurance that data has not been modified in an unauthorized manner after it was created, transmitted or stored. This means that there has been no insertion, deletion or substitution done with the data.

##### 4. Non Repudiation

What happens if Alice sends a message to Bob but denies that she has actually sent the message? Cases like these may happen and cryptography should prevent the originator or sender to act this way. One popular way to achieve this is through the use of digital signatures.
### Types of Cryptography
There are three main types of cryptography in use today.Two of them are key-based encryption algorithms, symmetric (or secret-key) and asymmetric (or public-key) algorithms. While third one, hasing is used for data integrity purpose. 

##### 1. Symemetric Cryptography
This type of cryptography technique uses just a single key. The sender applies a key to encrypt a message while the receiver applies the same key to decrypt the message. Since only single key is used so we say that this is a symmetric encryption.

Symmetric algorithms can be divided into stream ciphers and block ciphers. Stream ciphers can encrypt a single bit of plaintext at a time, whereas block ciphers take a number of bits (typically 64 bits in modern ciphers), and encrypt them as a single unit.The most common block cipher in current use is Advanced Encryption Standard (AES).

* Caesar cipher : A little over 2,000 years ago, Julius Caesar developed a simple system to send secure information to his troops. It was all about substituting certain letters for others, typically by shifting the letters by a predetermined number.

 * Enigma Machines :  The cipher machines, famous for their use by the Nazis in World War II, were made up of electronically-connected rotors. Although the messages, which were deciphered with a set of daily keys, were hard to crack, the whole operation proved breakable after a lot of hard work.The legendary scientist Alan Turing with his proposed Turing maching broke the enigma. Because Germany’s movements became predictable, that work helped turn the tide of the war and sped up the Allies’ victory.
 * Data Encryption Standard : The Data Encryption Standard (DES) was the first modern symmetric key algorithm used for encryption of digital data. Developed in the 1970s at IBM, DES became the Federal Information Processing Standard for the United States in 1977 and became the foundation for which modern encryption technologies were built.


##### 2. Asymmetric Cryptography

This type of cryptography technique involves two key crypto system in which a secure communication can take place between receiver and sender over insecure communication channel. Since a pair of keys is applied here so this technique is also known as asymmetric encryption.

In this method, each party has a private key and a public key. The private is secret and is not revealed while the public key is shared with all those whom you want to communicate with. If Alice wants to send a message to bob, then Alice will encrypt it with Bob’s public key and Bob can decrypt the message with its private key.

This is most commonly used in transmitting information via email using SSL, TLS or PGP, remotely connecting to a server using RSA or SSH and even for digitally signing PDF file. Whenever you see an URL that starts with “https://”, you are looking at an example of asymmetric cryptography in action.


##### 3. Hashing
Hashing is changing a message into an unreadable string not for the purpose of hiding the message, but more for verifying the contents of the message. This is most commonly used in the transmission of software or large files where the publisher offers the program and it’s hash for download. A user downloads the software, runs the downloaded file through the same hashing algorithm and compares the resulting hash to the one provided by the publisher. If they match then the download is complete and uncorrupted.

In essence it proves that the file received by the user is an exact copy of the file provided by the publisher. Even the smallest change to the downloaded file, by either corruption or intentional intervention, will change the resulting hash drastically. Two common hashing algorithms are MD5 and SHA.

So we see that how different types of cryptography techniques (described above) are used to implement the basic principles that we discussed earlier. In the future article of this series, we’ll cover more advanced topics on Cryptography.


### Reference Material

Now that you know the basic stuff of crypto, you might learn more on your own. There are dozens of good resouces on the net. I've compiled the list of some of them.

* [Basic cryptology concepts ( IBM Tutorial )](https://www.ibm.com/developerworks/tivoli/tutorials/s-crypto/s-crypto.html)
* [Journey into cryptography ( Khan academy )](https://tutorial.djangogirls.org/en/python_introduction/)
* [Cryptopals Challenges ( Learn by Doing )](https://www.crypto101.io/)
* [Crypto101 ( Intoductory Book )](https://www.crypto101.io/)
* [Mystery Twister ( The Cipher Contest)](https://www.crypto101.io/)
* [Applied Cryptography ( Udacity )](https://in.udacity.com/course/applied-cryptography--cs387)
* [Hacking Secret Ciphers with Python ( learn python from basic along with crypto stuff )](inventwithpython.com/hacking/index.html)
* [ Awesome Cryptography ( Futher Resources ) ](https://github.com/sobolevn/awesome-cryptography)







 

