---
layout: post
title: "Kickstart to Django"
date: 2017-07-30
author: Aniket Pandey
website: http://aniketp41.github.io
category: 
tags: 
- django
- tutorial
categories:
- tutorial
- django

image:
  url:

---

### What is Django?

According to the official page, Django is a "web framework for perfectionists with deadlines". Sounds like something you'd go for when you're in a scurry. Well, as a matter of fact, it is the case. It is useful when you want a basic web-app up and running in no time without having to worry about dependencies and setup environment. 

Django does everything for you behind the scenes. Be it user-authentication, form handling, template rendering or even trivial stuff like migrating database. Also, Django being a framework in python essentially means it will be intuitive, no additional syntax headache.

### Getting Started

I'll assume you already know about Pypi. If not, checkout their [webpage](https://pypi.python.org/pypi). 

Create a new project directory and install django

{% highlight shell %}
$ mkdir django-projects
$ cd django-projects
$ sudo pip3 install django   # django installed globally
{% endhighlight %}

Now start a Django project inside `django-projects` directory

{% highlight shell %}
django-admin startproject mysite
{% endhighlight %}

This will create a bunch of files and directories within your project directory. These are the administrative files of your project. Most probably you won't even touch 
the code that is written inside them. 

> So how do I write my own code?

Well, for that you need to create an app within your project. All your code goes inside the app directory. But first, why don't we checkout how the development environment looks? To do that, type the command in the bash.

{% highlight shell %}
$ python3 manage.py runserver
{% endhighlight %}

This will start a local server at `localhost:8000`. The page will greet you with a success message if you did everything right.

### Projects vs Apps

What’s the difference between a project and an app? An app is a Web application that does something – e.g., a Weblog system, a database of public records or a simple poll app. A project is a collection of configuration and apps for a particular website. A project can contain multiple apps. An app can be in multiple projects.


### Creating the first app

Once you're done with the basic setup of your project, you can go forward and create any number of apps you want. Because if you want your website to go viral and take over the internet, you need to have multiple apps :P . Type this command to create your first app.

{% highlight shell %}
$ python3 manage.py startapp appname
{% endhighlight %}

This will create an app directory called `appname/` within your project. The main file heirarchy will look like this:

```
mysite/
    manage.py
    mysite/
        __init__.py
        settings.py
        urls.py
        wsgi.py
    appname/
        __init__.py
        admin.py
        apps.py
        migrations/
            __init__.py
        models.py
        tests.py
        urls.py
        views.py
```
This might probably be confusing at this moment. You already have so many python files and I have not explained what each one of them do. Well, hang tight. I'll get there.

Now that you have your it, you need to include this `appname` in the INSTALLED_APPS tuple in `mysite/setting.py`. This lets Django know that you will be working with an additional app that Django did not know about previously. To complete the step, you need to migrate your database. By doing that, you'll be able to create tables in the database.

Django provides an inbuilt database `SQLite`. To initiate it, type the following commands

{% highlight shell %}
$ python3 manage.py makemigrations        # Prepare SQL queries
$ python3 manage.py migrate               # Execute them
{% endhighlight %}

### Django Models

A model is the single, definitive source of information about your data. It contains the essential fields and behaviors of the data you’re storing. Generally, each model maps to a single database table. All the columns in the table can be specified as the properties of the model, for example,

``` python
from django.db import models

class Person(models.Model):
    first_name = models.CharField(max_length=30)
    last_name = models.CharField(max_length=30)
```
Equivalent SQL Query

```
 CREATE TABLE Person (
    first_name varchar(30),
    last_name varchar(30),
    PRIMARY KEY (id), 
 );
```

### Django Views

A view is a callable which takes a request and returns a response. This can be more than just a function, and Django provides an example of some classes which can be used as views. These allow you to structure your views and reuse code by harnessing inheritance and mixins. Views can respond in many ways, e.g through JSON data or by rendering whole XML template. 
 
 
### Ending

I along with my project partner created two web applications in Django. Here are the links to them.

* [Gymkhana Nominations Portal](http://github.com/aniketp41/Gymkhana-Nominations.git) *
* [Awesome Library](http://github.com/SummerCamp17/awesome-library.git)

\* Nominated as the **Best Summer Project** in Programming Club.

### Reference Material

Now that you know how to setup your project structure, you might want to build a few apps on your own. There are dozens of good tutorials available on Django. I've compiled the list of some of them.

* [Documentation Tutorial](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.11/intro/tutorial01/)
* [MDN Tutorial](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Server-side/Django/Tutorial_local_library_website)
* [Djano Girls tutorial](https://tutorial.djangogirls.org/en/python_introduction/)
* [thenewboston](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qgGIqRFvFFk)






 
