Getting Started with Android App Development ….
===============================================

- Aryan Sharma

![](media/image12.png){width="8.45312554680665in" height="4.302083333333333in"}
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

What is Android?
----------------

Android is an open source mobile operating system that combines and builds upon parts of many different open source projects. What does this mean to you as a developer? You have access to the source code of the platform that is running on the phone. This can help you better understand how interface controls and the various other pieces work. If you happen to find a bug, you can also submit a patch for the issue, though this is a more advanced practice. Google has also pulled together a large group of companies (called the Open Handset Alliance) that both contribute to and use the Android OS in their hardware devices. This means that there is industry-wide support for Google's OS, promising wide adoption across well-known vendors.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Why Android?
------------

There are many advantages to developing for the Android platform:

-   **Zero startup costs to begin development.** The development tools
    > for the platform are free to download, and Google only charges a
    > small fee to distribute applications on the Android Market.

-   **Freedom to innovate.** The Android OS is an open-source platform
    > based on the Linux kernel and multiple open-source libraries. In
    > addition to building applications to run on Android devices,
    > developers are free to contribute to or extend the platform
    > as well.

-   **Freedom to collaborate.** Android developers are not required to
    > sign an NDA and are encouraged to collaborate and share source
    > code with each other. According to a survey by Black Duck
    > Software, the number of open source mobile apps and libraries grew
    > at a rate of 168% from 2008 to 2009, faster on Android than any
    > other platform. This means more code that you can reuse in your
    > own projects to bring them to market much faster.

-   **Open distribution model.** Very few restrictions are placed on the
    > content or functionality allowed in Google’s Android Market, and
    > developers are free to distribute their applications through other
    > distribution channels as well.

-   **Multi-platform support.** There are a wide variety of hardware
    > devices powered by the Android OS, including many different phones
    > and tablet computers. Development for the platform can occur on
    > Windows, Mac OS or Linux.

-   **Multi-carrier support.** A large number of telecom carriers
    > currently offer Android powered phones.

Learning Android App Development
--------------------------------

1\) The first step is to learn Java. Trying to learn android without
knowing java is like jumping to ride a Ferrari without learning to drive
in the first place! For Java lessons, you can hop in here:

-   Tutorial to get started with Java – [*A beginner’s guide to Java
    > Programming*](http://www.javacoffeebreak.com/tutorials/gettingstarted/).

-   [*Tutorial for beginners*](http://www.javabeginner.com/).

-   You can also read up Jolt Award winning book: Bruce Eckel’s
    > [*Thinking in
    > Java*](http://www.amazon.com/Thinking-Java-Introduction-Object-Oriented-Programming/dp/0131002872),
    > 3rd edition.

2\) Once you are acquainted with Java essentials, you can get going with
android development tutorials. Here’s a list where you can start off
with your android learning:

-   Before anything else, every aspiring android developer should go
    > through the blog post “[*Resources every android developer should
    > know*](http://www.bongizmo.com/blog/android-resources-each-developer-should-know/)”
    > by Sergy Povzner.

-   [*Official Developer
    > Tutorial*](http://developer.android.com/training/basics/firstapp/index.html)–
    > This has been created by open source developers and
    > android community. This is the best place for a beginner to start.

-   At [*HelloAndroid*](http://www.helloandroid.com/tutorials) you can
    > avail some good articles along with useful snippets of codes.

-   Another good place is [*Script
    > Tutorials*](http://www.script-tutorials.com/tag/android/).

**For answers to all your queries, you can look at
[*stackoverflow.com*](http://stackoverflow.com/)**

3\) For a thorough learning of android development, you can take up:

-   [*Android App Development
    > Course*](http://www.venturesity.com/course/android-online-training-live-android-app-development)
    > at Venturesity. It is a 2 months’ course divided in 8 modules.
    > Best industry experts teach students from zero! Students can pick
    > up project ideas from the database provided at Venturesity and
    > complete the same under proper guidance. The best part is,
    > Venturesity gives its students ample scope to learn
    > and experiment.

-   [*Udacity Android App Development
    > Course*](https://in.udacity.com/course/android-basics-user-interface--ud834)
    > is also a very good platform to begin with app development. It is
    > offered by google and it has a rich learning and
    > interactive environment. All the concepts are taught from the
    > scratch which includes the basics of Java. I personally recommend
    > this course to begin with App Development.It is divided into three
    > levels: Basic, Intermediate and Advanced level. You are supposed
    > to go in three steps -

    -   [*Developing Android Apps :
        > Beginner*](https://in.udacity.com/course/android-basics-user-interface--ud834)

    -   [*Developing Android Apps :
        > Intermediate*](https://in.udacity.com/course/new-android-fundamentals--ud851)

    -   [*Developing Android Apps :
        > Advanced*](https://in.udacity.com/course/advanced-android-app-development--ud855)

-   [*Develop Apps | Android
    > Developers*](http://developer.android.com/develop/index.html) - An
    > absolute treasure trove of resources, tools, info, documents, news
    > and pretty much anything you could ever want for Android devs.

-   [*Vogella Android Development
    > Tutorials*](http://www.vogella.com/tutorials/android.html) -
    > Wonderful step-by-step Android tutorials for beginners. Very good
    > if you want to go at your own pace and sort of teach yourself.
    > Fairly easy to follow and understand for beginners.

-   [*AndroidHive - Tutorials, Games, Apps,
    > Tips*](http://www.androidhive.info/) - A nice website to find
    > tutorials and tips (as you may guess from the link). Lots of
    > useful info here.

Getting Started ….
------------------

Step 1: Download Android Studio
-------------------------------

To program in most languages, you need a piece of software called an IDE
or ‘Integrated Development Environment’. The most common IDE for Android
development is [*Android
Studio*](http://www.androidauthority.com/android-studio-tutorial-beginners-637572/),
which comes direct from Google itself. You can get it
[*here*](http://developer.android.com/sdk/index.html?gclid=Cj0KEQiAm-CyBRDx65nBhcmVtbIBEiQA7zm8lWCaBd9n9KYYunFXxXsQCPojBVHk5eIH4p9CWM1eLfUaAmd28P8HAQ).

An IDE is what gives you the main UI where you’ll enter your code (you
can’t just start typing into notepad). It also highlights things you get
wrong, offers suggestions and lets you run and test your creations
conveniently. It creates the files you need, it provides basic layouts
and generally it saves you a lot of time and effort.

![](media/image15.png){width="6.5in" height="4.333333333333333in"}

What’s great about Android Studio is that it is designed specifically
for Android development (unlike the second most popular option,
Eclipse). This means that when you download the software, you’ll also
get a lot of the other bits you need including the Android SDK (a
selection of tools including the Android platform itself) and the
Android Virtual Device, which is an emulator you can test your apps on.
When you go through the installation, make sure you leave the boxes
ticked to confirm that you want these additional components. You could
manually add them later, but this will just complicate matters.

As mentioned, there are some alternatives to Android Studio.
[*Eclipse*](https://eclipse.org/downloads/) is an older IDE that can be
used for developing other things too (such as iOS apps) and that is a
bit more flexible overall. It’s also a much more fiddly to get started
with though and not nearly as beginner-friendly. Another personal
favorite of mine is [*Basic4Android*](http://www.b4x.com/).
Basic4Android is an IDE that lets you code Android apps with the BASIC
programming language. It makes things easier in a number of other ways
too and is focused on ‘rapid development’.

SEE ALSO:

[*Writing your first Android game using the Corona
SDK*](http://www.androidauthority.com/writing-your-first-android-game-623386/)

There are other options too, such as Unity3D and numerous app builders,
each of which has specific strengths and weaknesses depending on what
you’re planning on building. For the sake of simplicity though, we’re
focusing on Android Studio because it has become the ‘main’ way to build
basic apps and pretty much the industry standard. If you think you might
ever sell your business, if you want to give yourself the most
flexibility and control possible, or if you’d like to become a
professional app developer, you’ll need this tool.

That said, if you read through all this and you find it too much still,
you might want to consider Basic4Android as a simpler approach and I’ll
be covering that in a future post.

Okay, just to recap: we now have Android Studio downloaded and
installed. But, don’t run it until you read step two! So far so good…
What could possibly go wrong?

Step 2: Setting Up Android Studio
---------------------------------

Now you have Android Studio installed you’ve taken your first, bold step
toward becoming a developer! A lot of people only manage it this far and
then leave the software installed on their computer for months on end,
feeling guilty every time they see it in the Start Menu. Eventually they
end deleting it to make space for the next AAA title on Steam and so
ends the whole sorry affair… Don’t end up like them – it’s time for some
more affirmative action!

Before you can get started, you also need to install Java on your
machine to use Android Studio. Specifically, you’re going to need
install the Java Development Kit (JDK). Java is the programming language
you’re going to be using to build your apps in this instance and you
need to install the JDK in order for Android Studio to be able to
interpret and compile your code (compiling means turning the source into
something that is understood by the CPU – machine code). You’ll find the
Java Development Kit
[*here*](http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/jdk8-downloads-2133151.html).
Just download and follow the instructions to install.

*Now* you can click on Android Studio to launch it. Once it opens up,
you’ll be presented with a menu where you’ll be able to get started or
configure some options. The great thing is that everything is handled
for you at this point, though you may want to familiarize yourself with
the SDK Manager(Configure &gt; SDK Manager) which is where you’ll update
your Android SDK to support newer versions, as well as download things
like code samples or support for Google Glass. But don’t worry about
that now but if Android Studio says you’re missing something, this is
where you’ll probably need to go to find it.

So really there are three main things interacting when you use Android
Studio to create your apps.

-   Android Studio itself, which is an IDE that provides you with a nice
    > interface for coding.

-   The code you write in Java, which you installed a moment ago…

-   And the Android SDK which you’ll access through your Java code in
    > order to do Android-type things

If you find this all a bit complicated and daunting then… well, you
don’t know you’re born. This used to be *way* worse.

Maybe that offers some consolation…

Step 3: Starting a New Project
------------------------------

Once you’ve installed your samples, you can go back to the first page
you saw when you loaded up Android Studio. Now you want to choose Start
a new Android Studio Project – it’s finally happening!

Enter the name you want for your application and your ‘company domain’.
Together these elements will be used to create your package name with
the following format:

com.companyname.appname

The package will be the compiled file or APK (‘Android Package File’)
that you’ll eventually upload to the Google Play Store. There are ways
that people can see this, so if you’re planning on making something
you’ll eventually release, try to stay away from using ‘funny words’.

![](media/image16.png){width="6.5in" height="3.9583333333333335in"}

The last field to enter is the directory where you want to save all the
files pertaining to your app. I like to save in DropBox to make sure I
always have a backup of my code. Click Next again and guess what… More
options! Huzzah! Don’t worry, we’re nearly there…

Next you need to decide what type of device you’re going to be
developing for and in this case we’ll start with the Phone and Tablet
option. Other options are TV, Wear and Glass. It’s fine if you want to
develop for a myriad of platforms in the future – that’s one of the
wonders of Android – but let’s start with something a bit more
straightforward to begin with, okay?

The other choice you have to make at this stage is the ‘Minimum SDK’.
This is the lowest version of Android you want to support. Why not just
enter the latest version of Android in here? Well, because relatively
few people actually *have* the latest version of Android installed on
their device at any given time. You want to support phones that are
still running older versions in order to reach the largest possible
audience – especially overseas.

Why not just go with Android 1.1? Well, apart from this not being an
option (Froyo is as low as you can go), that would also prevent you from
using any of the fancy new features from the latest updates.

The best bet at this stage is to go with the default option, so just
leave this field as it is. On the next page, you’ll be given the option
to pick the way you want your app to look at the start. This will be the
look of your main ‘Activity Module’ which is basically the main page of
your app. Think of these like templates; do you want to have the title
of your app along the top of the screen, or do you want your UI to fill
the whole display? Do you want to start off with some elements
ready-designed for you? Is your app primarily going to use Google Maps
(don’t go here for a bit, things get more complicated with Google Play
Services).

![](media/image11.png){width="6.5in" height="3.9583333333333335in"}

Bear in mind that an app can have multiple activities that act like
separate pages on a website. You might have a ‘settings’ activity for
instance and a ‘main’ activity. So the activity isn’t the *app* per say
but rather one stand-alone page of your app.

For your first creation though, you’ll probably do best to make
something *really* simple that just displays a single, basic activity.
Select ‘Basic Activity’ to keep things as simple as possible and for all
intents and purposes, this will now be your app. Click Next again you
get the last few options.

Now you get to pick the name for your activity and the layout name (if
you chose ‘Basic Activity’ you’ll also have the title option and the
‘menu\_resource’ name). The activity name is how you’ll refer to your
activities in your code, so call it something logical (good advice for
coding generally) like ‘MainActivity’. Creative, I know.

The layout name meanwhile describes a file that determines the layout of
an activity. This is a separate piece of code that runs in concert with
the main activity code to define where elements like images and menus go
and what fonts you’ll use. This is actually not Java but XML – or
Extensible Markup Language if you want to impress your friends.

For anyone with a background in web development, your XML is going to
work a little like HTML or a CSS style sheet. The Java code for the
activity meanwhile says *what* the elements on the screen do when
pressed etc. It’s fine to leave the default name here as
‘activity\_main’. Lastly, choose a name for the menu and for the title.
Pick something nice for the title, as your users will be able to see
this at some points. Click next… and now you get to see your app!

Your blank, useless app… All that just to get started! You see why
people give up? But really we can break it down into the following very
basic steps:

-   Download and install Android Studio, making sure to include the
    > Android SDK

-   Install Java SDK

-   Start a new project and select the basic details

So it’s really not that bad… And remember: once you’ve done all this
once, you can forget about it forever and focus on the fun stuff:
creating apps! Your tea is probably cold at this point, so the next very
important step, is to get more.

Step 4: Making an Actual Thing
------------------------------

Once your app opens, you should see a directory tree on the left with
all the different files and folders that make up your app and a picture
of a phone displaying ‘Hello World!’ in the center. Well, hello to you
as well!

(A basic app that displays ‘Hello World’ is what most new developers
make first when they learn to program in a new language. Android Studio
cheats though, because it does it for you!)

You might notice that the open tab (along the top) is
‘activity\_main.xml’, which is what the big phone is showing on its
display. You may recall that activity\_main.xml is the XML code that
defines the layout instructions for your main activity.

If you selected ‘Basic Activity’ when you started your project, then
you’ll see a second XML file too called ‘content\_main.xml’. For the
most part, these two do the same thing but the ‘acitvity\_main.xml’
contains the basic layout that Android Studio created for you when you
selected ‘Basic Activity’. The stuff you want to edit is in
content\_main.xml, so open that up and don’t worry about it for now.

(If this isn’t what is open to start, then use the directory on the left
to open it by choosing: *app &gt; res &gt; content\_main.xml.*)

### **The Layout**

Android Studio is not showing the XML code itself here but rather a
rendering of how the layout will appear on the screen. This is a visual
editor a bit like Dreamweaver for web design and it makes life a little
easier for us developers.

You also have a bunch of options called ‘widgets’ down the left that you
can add to your app. This is your basic app stuff; so for instance, if
you want to add a button saying ‘OK’ to your activity, you can simply
drag it over to the screen and drop it anywhere you like. Go ahead and
dump an ‘OK’ button right underneath the ‘Hello World’.

Something else you’ll find is that you can click on either of these
elements in order to change the text and the ‘ID’. The ID is how you’re
refer to each element (called a ‘view’) in your Java code, while the
text is of course what you display to the user.

Delete the ‘Hello World’ widget (or view) and change the text on the
button to ‘Hello?’. Likewise, change the ‘id’ on the button to
‘button1’.

I am now stealthily getting you to write a little program… Notice as
well that when you select a view, you get options in the bottom right to
change the text color and size etc. You can play around with these
variables if you like to change the look of your button. We’re coming
back here in a minute though so make a mental note!

&gt;Now open up your MainActivity.java. The tab will be along the top
but in case it isn’t, find it under: *App &gt; Java.*

This is the code that defines the behavior of your app. At this stage,
you’re going to add in a little passage of code:

**public** **void** **buttonOnClick**(View v) {

Button button1 = (Button) v;

((Button) v).setText("Hello!");

}

This is going to go right underneath the first lone *closed* bracket
‘}’, just before the “@Override, Public Boolean”. It should look like
this:

![](media/image13.png){width="6.5in" height="2.4583333333333335in"}

What does it all mean? Well basically, anything following “void
buttonOnClick” will be carried out when someone clicks on the button.
We’re then finding the button with the “Button button1 = (Button) v;”
code and then changing the text.

Yes, there are other ways you could achieve the same thing but I feel
like this keeps it nice and simple and thus easy to understand. Spend
some time reading it and try to get your head around what is doing what…

At the top of the page is the word ‘import…’. Click on that to expand it
and make sure that somewhere there is the line: “import
android.widget.Button;”. It should have appeared on its own when you
typed out the last bit (Android Studio is smart like that) but you can
add it yourself if it didn’t.

![](media/image9.png){width="6.5in" height="2.2083333333333335in"}

(Notice as we type that lines end in “;”. This is basic Java formatting
and if you forget one, it will throw up an error. Get used to searching
around for them!)

Now go back to your content\_main.xml and click on the button. In the
right corner, where you have your parameters for the button, you should
be able to find an option called ‘onClick’. Click on this and then
select the ‘onClick’ line of code you just wrote from the drop down
menu. What you’ve just done, is told Android Studio that you want to
associate the section of code with the button you created (because
you’ll have lots of buttons in future).

![](media/image8.png){width="6.5in" height="5.097222222222222in"}

Now all that’s left to do is run the app you just made. Simple go to
‘run’ along the top and then select ‘run app’ from the drop down menu.
You should already have your AVD (Android Virtual Device) installed but
if not, you can go to: *tools &gt; Android &gt; AVD Manager &gt; +
Create Virtual Device*. Don’t forget you also need to install an Android
version *onto* the device.

![](media/image10.jpg){width="4.166666666666667in"
height="7.402777777777778in"}

Follow the steps to launch the emulator running your app. Be patient, it
can sometimes take an *age* to load up… If it *never* loads up, you can
consider ‘packaging’ the app in order to create an APK. Drag this onto
your Android device and double click on it to install and run it.

Once it’s finally up and running you can have a go with this fun, fun
app. What you should find is that when you click the button, the text
from ‘Hello?’ to ‘Hello!’. We’re going to be rich…

(If it doesn’t work… something has gone wrong. It wasn’t me, my one
works! Look for red text in your code and hover your mouse over it to
get suggestions from Android Studio.)

**“If you think your app has no bugs you haven't tested it on enough
devices ;)”**

**Happy Coding :)**
